README.md, before:

# Anti-Asian sentiment in the UK during the Covid-19 pandemic: analysing Twitter data through sentiment analysis using SVM and VADER machine learning

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is the illness caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), first discovered in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China. The COVID-19 pandemic has dramatically changed the way individuals live their lives since the virus’s first discovery in China in 2019. For a large number of individuals, this novel coronavirus has not only presented health risks but also risks to their physical and mental wellbeing as they have become victims of unfair prejudice. This has been caused by fear of the virus which has led to a wave of anti-Asian sentiment and discrimination, as well as a sharp increase in hate crimes.  This change in sentiment has been well-documented, with reports of victims being spat on, and otherwise being physically and verbally assaulted in the street becoming commonplace. Statistics show that this is reflected online, with social media sites seeing a dramatic increase in negative posts referring to Asian people. One NHS doctor wrote that to stay silent is to allow “anti-Asian sentiment - and racist attacks to damage our society, the repercussions of which will likely persist beyond the pandemic”  (Coates, 2020). It is highly likely that this anti-Asian sentiment still exists and the repercussions are still being felt. There is an obligation to attempt to uncover this prejudice if it exists, and that is the ambition of this project - to examine the extent to which anti-Asian sentiment has changed in the UK over the course of the pandemic by analysing Twitter data.

# Keywords for search query:
a combination of East and South East Asian countries and nationalities and racial slurs for Asian people.
Racial slurs taken from a public online database of racial slurs.
Full list can be seen in **'rawkeywordlist.csv'**.

In **'asianKeywordOrderedBySum.ipynb'** Keywords are extracted from csv and placed in order of relevance (most used to least used) by examining each word's use in January 2019 and January 2020.
Any keyword that was used 0 times in both months is removed (twitter's search query is limited to 1024 characters).
Final keyword list found in **'finalAsianKeywords'**.

# Tweet Counts

In **'tweetCountsAsianKeywords.ipnb'** a query is created using the finalAsianKeywords to search for tweets coming from the UK from January 2019 to June 2022.
Using this query I display changing levels of matching tweets.

# Collecting data

In **'tweetScrape.ipnb'** I collect matching tweets using the keyword list, over the period Jan 2019 - June 2020.
tweets are saved in **'twitterDataOutput.csv'**.
nearly 500,000 matching tweets were collected.

# Sentiment Analaysis Using SVM

In **sentimentAnalysisSVM_PreprocessingData.ipynb** I prepare the sentiment140 dataset (a dataset of 1.6 million tweets labelled positive or negative). I do not alter the original data, but instead create a new dataset that includes the label, the original tweet, and several different processed versions (with numbers, punctuation, links etc removed, stopwords removed, and all words are lemmatized and one unlemmatized version). In order from least processed to most processed collumns: tweet > cleanTweet > unLemNoStops (stop words removed but no lemmatization) > lemmatizedTweet.

In **sentimentAnalysisSVM_Models.ipynb** I display some insights on the dataset and I train several versions of a linearSVC model and display accuracy / f1 scores for these models. 

![SVM sentiment analysis by week](https://github.com/ORJackson/CSCM20_Project/blob/main/images/SVM%20LinearSVC/SVM%20(LinearSVC)%20sentiment%20analysis%20negative%20tweets%20as%20a%20percentage%20of%20total%20Tweets%20collected%20per%20month.png)

# Sentiment Analysis using VADER

In **'vaderSentimentAnalysis.ipynb'** I carry out sentiment analysis using VADER.
Tweets are assigned a value of positive, negative, or neutral.
I display wordclouds displaying most commonly used words in the three groups.
I display a graph showing changing levels of positive, negative, and neutral tweets over time.



![Vader sentiment analysis](https://github.com/ORJackson/CSCM20_Project/blob/main/images/VADER/VADER1(preprocessing1).png)

Commit message:

deleting unnecessary files, preparing for submission

README.md, after:

# Anti-East and Southeast Asian sentiment in the UK during the COVID-19 pandemic: Twitter sentiment analysis using SVM machine learning and VADER

# ABSTRACT

# Background: 
In the UK reports of hate crimes against East and Southeast Asians rose by 300% after the COVID-19 pandemic began. There was an increase of 1662% in Asian-targeted hate speech online in 2020 compared to 2019 (Cipirska, 2021). However, no UK-specific research into changes in sentiment towards East and Southeast Asians over the pandemic has yet been carried out. When investigating optimum preprocessing techniques for Support Vector Machine (SVM) sentiment analysis, I found that the results from  the research are often contradictory. 
# First Research Question: 
“To what extent has UK-based sentiment on Twitter towards East and Southeast Asia and Asians changed over the COVID-19 pandemic?”. 
# Second Research Question: 
“What are the optimum preprocessing techniques for carrying out SVM-powered sentiment analysis on Twitter data?”. 
# Methods: 
I carried out experimentation using the sentiment140 dataset to produce results on the optimum preprocessing techniques for sentiment analysis with SVM. Using the Twitter API, I collected 448,802 tweets that used one keyword related to East and Southeast Asia posted in the UK between January 2019 and June 2022. Making use of the results from the preprocessing experimentation, I first carried out sentiment analysis using an SVM (LinearSVC) classifier (with an F1-score of 0.82). I then carried out sentiment analysis using the rule-based classifier VADER. 
# Results: 
Through preprocessing experimentation I found that stop word removal, short word removal, and lemmatization negatively impact classification performance. Several other techniques were shown not to improve performance but could be useful for noise reduction. Sentiment analysis powered by SVM and VADER both demonstrated a peak of negative sentiment in March 2020. Comparing this month with March 2019 SVM results show the proportion of negative tweets referencing an East and Southeast Asian keyword increased by 66.8%, and VADER results show an increase of 60.6%. 
# Conclusion: 
UK-based negative sentiment towards East and Southeast Asians increased online as the COVID-19 pandemic developed.   My results show that stop word removal, short word removal, and lemmatization negatively affected SVM-powered classifier performance. Other techniques tested did not improve performance, but I conclude that they are useful for noise reduction, in line with the opinions of other researchers. Those techniques include: lowercasing; removal of user mentions, URLs, non-alphabet characters, and unnecessary whitespace; the translation of HTML symbols, emojis, and abbreviations; expanding contractions; and normalising repeated characters.

# Keywords for search query:
a combination of East and South East Asian countries and nationalities and racial slurs for Asian people.
Racial slurs taken from a public online database of racial slurs.
Full list can be seen in **'rawkeywordlist.csv'**.

In **'asianKeywordOrderedBySum.ipynb'** Keywords are extracted from csv and placed in order of relevance (most used to least used) by examining each word's use in January 2019 and January 2020.
Any keyword that was used 0 times in both months is removed (twitter's search query is limited to 1024 characters).
Final keyword list found in **'finalAsianKeywords'**.

# Tweet Counts

In **'tweetCountsAsianKeywords.ipnb'** a query is created using the finalAsianKeywords to search for tweets coming from the UK from January 2019 to June 2022.
Using this query I display changing levels of matching tweets.

# Collecting data

In **'tweetScrape.ipnb'** I collect matching tweets using the keyword list, over the period Jan 2019 - June 2020.
tweets are saved in **'twitterDataOutput.csv'**.
nearly 500,000 matching tweets were collected.

# Sentiment Analaysis Using SVM

In **sentimentAnalysisSVM_PreprocessingData.ipynb** I prepare the sentiment140 dataset (a dataset of 1.6 million tweets labelled positive or negative). I do not alter the original data, but instead create a new dataset that includes the label, the original tweet, and several different processed versions (with numbers, punctuation, links etc removed, stopwords removed, and all words are lemmatized and one unlemmatized version). In order from least processed to most processed collumns: tweet > cleanTweet > unLemNoStops (stop words removed but no lemmatization) > lemmatizedTweet.

In **sentimentAnalysisSVM_Models.ipynb** I display some insights on the dataset and I train several versions of a linearSVC model and display accuracy / f1 scores for these models. 

![SVM sentiment analysis by week](https://github.com/ORJackson/CSCM20_Project/blob/main/images/SVM%20LinearSVC/SVM%20(LinearSVC)%20sentiment%20analysis%20negative%20tweets%20as%20a%20percentage%20of%20total%20Tweets%20collected%20per%20month.png)

# Sentiment Analysis using VADER

In **'vaderSentimentAnalysis.ipynb'** I carry out sentiment analysis using VADER.
Tweets are assigned a value of positive, negative, or neutral.
I display wordclouds displaying most commonly used words in the three groups.
I display a graph showing changing levels of positive, negative, and neutral tweets over time.



![Vader sentiment analysis](https://github.com/ORJackson/CSCM20_Project/blob/main/images/VADER/VADER1(preprocessing1).png)
